Draft: Content and planning of virtualization/container chapter (#2)
Simulation-Software-Engineering/Lecture-Material: virtualization-and-containers/material/vagrant_slides.md

---
type: slide
slideOptions:
  transition: slide
  width: 1400
  height: 900
  margin: 0.1
---

<style>
  .reveal strong {
  font-weight: bold;
    color: orange;
  }
  .reveal p {
    text-align: left;
  }
  .reveal section h1 {
    color: orange;
  }
  .reveal section h2 {
    color: orange;
  }
</style>

# Vagrant

---

## Introduction

> - Remember:
>   > If you can't git diff a file format, it's broken.
> - Infrastructure as code
>   > Vagrant is a tool for building and managing virtual machine environments in a single workflow.
>   [https://www.vagrantup.com/intro](https://www.vagrantup.com/intro)
> - Initial release 2010 by Mitchell Hashimoto, now [HashiCorp](https://www.hashicorp.com/)
> - HashiCorp develops open-source DevOps/Cloud tools like [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/), [TerraForm](https://www.terraform.io/)...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remember:

> If you can't git diff a file format, it's broken.
  
- Infrastructure as code ([https://www.vagrantup.com/intro](https://www.vagrantup.com/intro))

> Vagrant is a tool for building and managing virtual machine environments in a single workflow.

- Initial release 2010 by Mitchell Hashimoto, now [HashiCorp](https://www.hashicorp.com/)
- HashiCorp develops open-source DevOps/Cloud tools like [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/), [TerraForm](https://www.terraform.io/)...
```

I think md needs these empty lines

Author: For code blocks it seems that Markdown wants these lines. For citations I did not get any complaints from `mdl` yet. The slides work on hedgedoc as well. Should we still change it?

---

## What for?

- Developing software
  - Set up consistent development environment
  - Share environment with others
- Testing software, workflows...
  - Disposable environments
  - Consistent workflows
- More general
  - Easy way to setup virtual machine

> 

Reviewer: Not sure what your plan, but here could be another occasion to mention "Reproducibility"

Author: I think it is always on my mind, but it is better to add it there as well.

---

## Advantages

- Strong focus on workflow consistency

> - Avoid usage of (VirtualBox) CLI

Reviewer: Why is it bad?

- Store in Git-friendly format
- For us:
  - Management of VirtualBox VMs (testing, developing...)
  - Sharing of VMs (debugging, workshops...)

---

> ## Building Block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Building Blocks
```
?

- Provisioners
  - Tool for configuring the boxes (install software on machine)
  - Examples: shell scripts, Chef, Puppet..
- Providers
  - "Backend" the box is based on

>   - Examples: VirtualBox, Hyper-V, AWS, Docker...

Reviewer: Does this slide really belong here? Only reading it, the connection to the surrounding slides is unclear.

Author: I agree. I moved it just after the introduction.

- Create `Vagrantfile` and specify image

  ```ruby
  Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
    config.vm.box = "ajaust/sse-first-steps"
    config.vm.box_version = "0.1.0"
  end
  ```

- Alternative:

  ```
  vagrant init ajaust/sse-first-steps
  ```

- Start VM with `vagrant up`

---

## Some Useful Commands 1/2

- `vagrant init USERNAME/BOXNAME or URL`
  - Initializes repository in current directory
  - Creates `Vagrantfile` -> Text file (Git friendly)
- `vagrant up`
  - Create VM and start it
  - VM is stored in `${HOME}/.vagrant.d/boxes` (overruled by `VAGRANT_HOME`)
- `vagrant ssh`
  - Connect to VM via ssh
- `vagrant destroy`
  - Stops the virtual machine and removes its disk

---

## Some Useful Commands 2/2

- `vagrant box list`
  - Show available boxes
- `vagrant box remove NAMEOFBOX`
  - Remove a box completely
- `vagrant suspend`
  - Suspends machine (sleep)
- `vagrant halt`
  - Shuts down machine keeping changes
- `vagrant reload --provision` or `vagrant provision`
  - Rebuild (partially) build image

---

## Exchanging Files

- Vagrant mounts shared folders
  - Check output when VM starts

  ```bash
  default: Mounting shared folders...
  ```

>   - File can be changed from Guest or Host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Files can be exchanged between Guest and Host
```
? Otherwise, I don't get this sentence

Author: Fixed.

- Default:

>   - Directory containing `Vagrantfile` mounted to `/vagrant` in the Guest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Directory containing `Vagrantfile` mounted to `/vagrant` in Guest
```

---

## Vagrant Cloud

- Repository of premade boxes: [https://app.vagrantup.com/](https://app.vagrantup.com/)
- Pack box:

  ```
  vagrant package --base "NAMEOFVM" --output BOXNAME.box
  ```

  - `NAMEOFVM` is name as shown in VirtualBox
  - `BOXNAME` name to store box to
- [Publish own boxes](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/providers/virtualbox/boxes) by uploading to [Vagrant Cloud](https://app.vagrantup.com/)

---

> ## Demo

Reviewer: I have the feeling the demo comes too late. Or do you already show some live things earlier when you show "some useful commands"?

Author: You are right about that. I had already made a note about that and moved one demo section just after the "useful commands" part.
